---
title: "About me"
date: 2021-03-26 12:00:00 +0100
permalink: /about/
layout: single
author_profile: true
toc: True
gallery:
  - url: /assets/images/karate_arenasdojo.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/karate_arenasdojo.jpg
    alt: "Uechi Ryu Kenyukai Spain"
    title: "At the Uechi Ryu Kenyukai Spain central dojo with Sensei Fujita and Sensei Arenas, 2017."
  - url: /assets/images/karate_honbudojo.jpg
    image_path: /assets/images/karate_honbudojo.jpg
    alt: "Uechi Ryu Kenyukai Okinawa"
    title: "At the Uechi Ryu Kenyukai central dojo in Okinawa with Hanshi Shinjo, 2015."
---

## Bio

My name is Miguel. I am a chemist by training, evolved into a structural biologist
interested in data science.

I work as a postdoctoral scientist at the **[Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut f√ºr Molekulare
Pharmakologie (FMP)](https://www.leibniz-fmp.de/home.html) in Berlin**. I apply solid
state **Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)** and other biophysical methods to understand
how proteins interact with each other -- or with themselves. In particular, I am
interested in [**Intrinsically Disordered
Proteins**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intrinsically_disordered_proteins).

## Skills

### Experimental

Despite my degree in Organic Chemistry I am terrible at synthesis, so you will not find
[*Breaking bad*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breaking_Bad) kind of Science here.
Instead, I am familiar with the basics of **molecular biology** for cloning, expression
and purification of isotopically labeled proteins in bacteria. So, I am used to handling
tiny amounts of sensitive (and often expensive) materials.

My main area of experimental expertise is **NMR**, both in liquid and solid states. In
solution NMR, we apply tailored sequences of radio-frequency pulses to samples under
very strong magnetic fields. In solid state NMR, we do the same while our samples rotate
many tens of thousands of times per second (kHz) -- we call this Magic Angle Spinning.
In some cases we even do all this at cryogenic temperatures while simultaneously
shooting microwaves at the sample (this is called *Dynamic Nuclear Polarization*).

In practice this all means dealing with big magnets with complex electronics,
pneumatic systems, cryogen liquids, programming... An endless source of fun and
technical problems!

![800 MHz](/assets/images/fmp800.jpg)
*A 800 MHz (18.8 Tesla) spectrometer at FMP-Berlin*

Finally, I often **integrate other biophysical and biochemical techniques** which I
understand at a shallower level, such as *Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS)*, *Light
Microscopy*, *Mass Spectrometry*, etc.

### Analytical

I am a GNU/Linux user since my early degree years. My current distribution of choice
both for professional and personal use is [Manjaro KDE](https://manjaro.org/).

During my PhD I started learning **Python** in order to consistently process increasing
amounts of data from multiple experimental sources. Because of the exploratory and
reporting nature of the daily work in structural biology research, I find *literate
coding* with `Jupyter` **notebooks** a powerful approach. My base stack is `pandas`,
`numpy`, `scikit-learn` and `scipy` for parsing and processing data, and `matplotlib`,
`seaborn` and `bokeh` for plotting. 

As my workflows became complex, I started writing proper Python scripts and modules and
adopting **best practices in software development** (version control, unit testing,
continuous integration, documenting, linting, etc.). I think this is a necessary step in making my research more reproducible and transparent.

Besides the analysis of my own experimental work, I have also written pipelines to
analyze databases of protein structures and sequences ([e.g. the Protein Data Bank -
PDB](https://www.rcsb.org/), or [Uniprot](https://www.uniprot.org/)) for genome-wide
analysis (but I would not dare calling myself a bioinformatician!).

Data visualization is an aspect I particularly enjoy in my work. I like finding new ways
to distill and display **insightful knowledge from complex data sources**. 

## Publications

You can see my academic CV [here](http://miguelarbesu.github.io/markdown-cv). Please
visit the [Research section](/research) for a detailed list of publications I have
authored or collaborated on.

## Engagement with the local scientific community

I am part of the [FMP+MDC PostDoc
Association](https://www.leibniz-fmp.de/education/fmp-postdoc-association.html). This
group of volunteers from the FMP and the neighboring [Max Delbruck Center for Molecular
Medicine](https://www.mdc-berlin.de/) at the Berlin-Buch Campus promotes networking
between postdocs, organizing meetings and seminars about research and career
development. We also hold the **[PostDoc Day](https://postdoc-day.mdc-berlin.de/)**, a
conference for early stage scientists in life sciences in the Berlin area. 

## Karate

I practice Karate since I was 10 years old. I hold a **3rd dan black belt** and belong
to [Uechi Ryu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uechi-Ry%C5%AB) Kenyukai Karate
association. I practiced Shotokan in my early years and Shito Ryu karate during my PhD,
and I was also an instructor in Uechi Ryu during that time.

{% include gallery caption="At the Uechi Ryu Kenyukai Spain & Okinawa central dojos" %}

---
